Robert Gu is a recovering Alzheimer's patient. The world that he
remembers was much as we know it today. Now, as he regains his
faculties through a cure developed during the years of his near-fatal
decline, he discovers that the world has changed and so has his place
in it. He was a world-renowned poet. Now he is seventy-five years old,
though by a medical miracle he looks much younger, and he's starting
over, for the first time unsure of his poetic gifts. Living with his
son's family, he has no choice but to learn how to cope with a new
information age in which the virtual and the real are a seamless
continuum, layers of reality built on digital views seen by a single
person or millions, depending on your choice. But the consensus
reality of the digital world is available only if, like his
thirteen-year-old granddaughter Miri, you know how to wear your
wireless access--through nodes designed into smart clothes--and to see
the digital context--through smart contact lenses.
 
With knowledge comes risk. When Robert begins to re-train at Fairmont
High, learning with other older people what is second nature to Miri
and other teens at school, he unwittingly becomes part of a
wide-ranging conspiracy to use technology as a tool for world
domination.
 
In a world where every computer chip has Homeland Security built-in,
this conspiracy is something that baffles even the most sophisticated
security analysts, including Robert's son and daughter-in law, two top
people in the U.S. military. And even Miri, in her attempts to protect
her grandfather, may be entangled in the plot.
 
As Robert becomes more deeply involved in conspiracy, he is shocked to
learn of a radical change planned for the UCSD Geisel Library; all the
books there, and worldwide, would cease to physically exist. He and
his fellow re-trainees feel compelled to join protests against the
change. With forces around the world converging on San Diego, both the
conspiracy and the protest climax in a spectacular moment as unique
and satisfying as it is unexpected. This is science fiction at its
very best, by a master storyteller at his peak.
