The Music of the Ainur

There was Eru, the One, who in Arda is called Ilúvatar; and he made
first the Ainur, the Holy Ones, that were the offspring of his
thought, and they were with him before aught else was made. And he
spoke to them, propounding to them themes of music; and they sang
before him, and he was glad. But for a long while they sang only each
alone, or but few together, while the rest hearkened; for each
comprehended only that part of the mind of Ilúvatar from which he
came, and in the understanding of their brethren they grew but
slowly. Yet ever as they listened they came to deeper understanding,
and increased in unison and harmony.

And it came to pass that Ilúvatar called together all the Ainur and
declared to them a mighty theme, unfolding to them things greater and
more wonderful than he had yet revealed; and the glory of its
beginning and the splendour of its end amazed the Ainur, so that they
bowed before Ilúvatar and were silent.

Then Ilúvatar said to them: ‘Of the theme that I have declared to you,
I will now that ye make in harmony together a Great Music. And since I
have kindled you with the Flame Imperishable, ye shall show forth your
powers in adorning this theme, each with his own thoughts and devices,
if he will. But I will sit and hearken, and be glad that through you
great beauty has been wakened into song.

Then the voices of the Ainur, like unto harps and lutes, and pipes and
trumpets, and viols and organs, and like unto countless choirs singing
with words, began to fashion the theme of Ilúvatar to a great music;
and a sound arose of endless interchanging melodies woven in harmony
that passed beyond hearing into the depths and into the heights, and
the places of the dwelling of Ilúvatar were filled to overflowing, and
the music and the echo of the music went out into the Void, and it was
not void. Never since have the Ainur made any music like to this
music, though it has been said that a greater still shall be made
before Ilúvatar by the choirs of the Ainur and the Children of
Ilúvatar after the end of days. Then the themes of Ilúvatar shall be
played aright, and take Being in the moment of their utterance, for
all shall then understand fully his intent in their part, and each
shall know the comprehension of each, and Ilúvatar shall give to their
thoughts the secret fire, being well pleased.

But now Ilúvatar sat and hearkened, and for a great while it seemed
good to him, for in the music there were no flaws. But as the theme
progressed, it came into the heart of Melkor to interweave matters of
his own imagining that were not in accord with the theme of Ilúvatar;
for he sought therein to increase the power and glory of the part
assigned to himself. To Melkor among the Ainur had been given the
greatest gifts of power and knowledge, and he had a share in all the
gifts of his brethren. He had gone often alone into the void places
seeking the Imperishable Flame; for desire grew hot within him to
bring into Being things of his own, and it seemed to him that Ilúvatar
took no thought for the Void, and he was impatient of its
emptiness. Yet he found not the Fire, for it is with Ilúvatar. But
being alone he had begun to conceive thoughts of his own unlike those
of his brethren.

Some of these thoughts he now wove into his music, and straight-way
discord arose about him, and many that sang nigh him grew despondent,
and their thought was disturbed and their music faltered; but some
began to attune their music to his rather than to the thought which
they had at first. Then the discord of Melkor spread ever wider, and
the melodies which had been heard before foundered in a sea of
turbulent sound. But Ilúvatar sat and hearkened until it seemed that
about his throne there was a raging storm, as of dark waters that made
war one upon another in an endless wrath that would not be assuaged.

Then Ilúvatar arose, and the Ainur perceived that he smiled; and he
lifted up his left hand, and a new theme began amid the storm, like
and yet unlike to the former theme, and it gathered power and had new
beauty. But the discord of Melkor rose in uproar and contended with
it, and again there was a war of sound more violent than before, until
many of the Ainur were dismayed and sang no longer, and Melkor had the
mastery. Then again Ilúvatar arose, and the Ainur perceived that his
countenance was stern; and he lifted up his right hand, and behold! a
third theme grew amid the confusion, and it was unlike the others. For
it seemed at first soft and sweet, a mere rippling of gentle sounds in
delicate melodies; but it could not be quenched, and it took to itself
power and profundity. And it seemed at last that there were two musics
progressing at one time before the seat of Ilúvatar, and they were
utterly at variance. The one was deep and wide and beautiful, but slow
and blended with an immeasurable sorrow, from which its beauty chiefly
came. The other had now achieved a unity of its own; but it was loud,
and vain, and endlessly repeated; and it had little harmony, but
rather a clamorous unison as of many trumpets braying upon a few
notes. And it essayed to drown the other music by the violence of its
voice, but it seemed that its most triumphant notes were taken by the
other and woven into its own solemn pattern.

In the midst of this strife, whereat the halls of Ilúvatar shook and a
tremor ran out into the silences yet unmoved, Ilúvatar arose a third
time, and his face was terrible to behold. Then he raised up both his
hands, and in one chord, deeper than the Abyss, higher than the
Firmament, piercing as the light of the eye of Ilúvatar, the Music
ceased.
